[KEP-4006] Blog Post: Streaming Transition from SPDY to WebSockets is Beta (#46971)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-08-20-websocket-transition.md

---
layout: blog
title: 'Streaming Transitions from SPDY to WebSockets'
date: 2024-08-20
slug: websockets-transition
author: >
  [Sean Sullivan](https://github.com/seans3) (Google)
  [Shannon Kularathna](https://github.com/shannonxtreme) (Google)
---

In Kubernetes 1.31, port forwarding over WebSocket is graduating to beta,
joining RemoteCommand over WebSocket, which graduated to beta in 1.30.

This post describes what these changes mean for you and why these streaming APIs
matter.

## Streaming APIs in Kubernetes

In Kubernetes, specific endpoints that are exposed as an HTTP or RESTful
interface are upgraded to streaming connections, which require a streaming
protocol. Unlike HTTP, which is a request-response protocol, a streaming
protocol provides a persistent connection that's bi-directional, low-latency,
and lets you interact in real-time. Streaming protocols support reading and
writing data between your client and the server, in both directions, over the
same connection. This type of connection is useful, for example, when you create
a shell in a running container from your local workstation and run commands in
the container.

> ## Why have we modified the streaming protocol ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why the streaming protocol is changing
```
nit

Author: Fixed.

Currently, Kubernetes uses the SPDY/3.1 protocol for upgraded streaming
connections. SPDY/3.1 has been deprecated for eight years. Many modern proxies,
gateways, and load balancers no longer support the protocol. As a result, you

> might notice that commands like kubectl cp, kubectl attach, kubectl exec, and
> kubectl port-forward stop working when you try to access your cluster through a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might notice that commands like `kubectl cp`, `kubectl attach`, `kubectl exec`, and
`kubectl port-forward` stop working when you try to access your cluster through a
```

Author: Fixed.

proxy or gateway.

As of Kubernetes 1.31, we're modifying the streaming protocol that Kubernetes
uses for these commands to the more modern [Websocket streaming protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6455).
The Websocket protocol is a currently supported standardized streaming protocol
that guarantees compatibility and interoperability with different components and
programming languages. The Websocket protocol is more widely supported by modern
proxies and gateways than SPDY.

> ## How do these streaming API’s work ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How streaming APIs work
```

> Streaming API’s work by upgrading an HTTP connection to a streaming connection.
> An HTTP upgrade request for running the date command on an nginx container
> within a cluster could look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes upgrades HTTP connections to streaming connections by adding
specific upgrade headers to the originating HTTP request. For example, an HTTP
upgrade request for running the `date` command on an `nginx` container within
a cluster is similar to the following:
```

Author: Fixed.

```shell
$ kubectl exec -v=8 nginx -- date
GET https://127.0.0.1:43251/api/v1/namespaces/default/pods/nginx/exec?command=date…
Request Headers:
    Connection: Upgrade
    Upgrade: websocket
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io
    User-Agent: kubectl/v1.30.1 (linux/amd64) kubernetes/6911225
```

> If the container runtime supports the Websocket streaming protocol and at least

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the container runtime supports the WebSocket streaming protocol and at least
```

one of the subprotocol versions (e.g. `v5.channel.k8s.io`), the server responds
with a successful `101 Switching Protocols` status, along with the negotiated
subprotocol version:

```shell
Response Status: 101 Switching Protocols in 3 milliseconds
Response Headers:
    Upgrade: websocket
    Connection: Upgrade
    Sec-Websocket-Accept: j0/jHW9RpaUoGsUAv97EcKw8jFM=
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io
```

At this point the TCP connection used for the HTTP protocol has changed to a
streaming connection. Subsequent STDIN, STDOUT, and STDERR data (as well as TTY
and process exit code data) for this shell interaction is then streamed over this
upgraded connection.

> ## How do I leverage the new Websocket streaming protocol ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to use the new Websocket streaming protocol
```

Author: Fixed.

> If your cluster version and kubectl are greater than or equal to v1.29, there
> are two control plane feature flags and two kubectl feature flags that govern
> the use of the new Websocket streaming protocol. As of v1.31 release, all of the
> following feature flags are in beta and are enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your cluster and kubectl are on version 1.29 or later, there are two
control plane feature flags and two kubectl feature flags that govern
the use of the new WebSocket streaming protocol. In version 1.31 and
later, all of the following feature flags are in beta and are enabled by
default:
```

- Control Plane Feature Flags
  - TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests
      - `/exec`
      - `/cp`
      - `/attach`
  - PortForwardWebsockets
      - `/port-forward`
- kubectl Feature Flags (environment variables)
  - `KUBECTL_REMOTE_COMMAND_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl exec`
      - `kubectl cp`
      - `kubectl attach`
  - `KUBECTL_PORT_FORWARD_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl port-forward`

> ## Where can I find more information on streaming API’s ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more about streaming APIs
```

Author: Fixed.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Streaming Transitions from SPDY to WebSockets'
date: 2024-08-20
slug: websockets-transition
author: >
  [Sean Sullivan](https://github.com/seans3) (Google)
  [Shannon Kularathna](https://github.com/shannonxtreme) (Google)
---

> In Kubernetes 1.31, by default kubectl now uses the WebSocket protocol
> instead of SPDY for streaming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.31 and later, Kubernetes uses the WebSocket protocol instead of
SPDY when upgrading HTTP connections from `kubectl` to streaming connections.
```

Reviewer: "connections from kubectl" might be inaccurate

Reviewer 2: For me (and I'm an editor for the blog), the original wording is OK; this isn't documentation so being more conversational is OK.

This post describes what these changes mean for you and why these streaming APIs
matter.

## Streaming APIs in Kubernetes

In Kubernetes, specific endpoints that are exposed as an HTTP or RESTful
interface are upgraded to streaming connections, which require a streaming
protocol. Unlike HTTP, which is a request-response protocol, a streaming
protocol provides a persistent connection that's bi-directional, low-latency,
and lets you interact in real-time. Streaming protocols support reading and
writing data between your client and the server, in both directions, over the
same connection. This type of connection is useful, for example, when you create
a shell in a running container from your local workstation and run commands in
the container.

> ## Why the streaming protocol is changing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why change the streaming protocol?
```

Author: Fixed.

> Currently, Kubernetes uses the SPDY/3.1 protocol for upgraded streaming

Reviewer 2: This will be published _after_ the release has happened, so: (eg)
```suggestion
Before the v1.31 release, Kubernetes used the SPDY/3.1 protocol by default when upgrading
existing connections to streaming
```

Author: Fixed.

connections. SPDY/3.1 has been deprecated for eight years, and it was never
standardized. Many modern proxies, gateways, and load balancers no longer
support the protocol. As a result, you might notice that commands like
`kubectl cp`, `kubectl attach`, `kubectl exec`, and `kubectl port-forward`
stop working when you try to access your cluster through a proxy or gateway.

> As of Kubernetes 1.31, we're modifying the streaming protocol that Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Kubernetes 1.31, we've modified the streaming protocol that a Kubernetes client
(such as `kubectl`)
```

Author: Fixed.

> uses for these commands to the more modern [Websocket streaming protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6455).

Reviewer: @seans3 pls replace Websocket with WebSocket throughout the file :)

Author: Fixed.

The WebSocket protocol is a currently supported standardized streaming protocol
that guarantees compatibility and interoperability with different components and
programming languages. The WebSocket protocol is more widely supported by modern
proxies and gateways than SPDY.

## How streaming APIs work

Kubernetes upgrades HTTP connections to streaming connections by adding
specific upgrade headers to the originating HTTP request. For example, an HTTP
upgrade request for running the `date` command on an `nginx` container within
a cluster is similar to the following:

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: Don't mark this as shell as it's not a shell script. Try `console` instead.

Author: Fixed.

$ kubectl exec -v=8 nginx -- date
GET https://127.0.0.1:43251/api/v1/namespaces/default/pods/nginx/exec?command=date…
Request Headers:
    Connection: Upgrade
    Upgrade: websocket
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io
    User-Agent: kubectl/v1.30.1 (linux/amd64) kubernetes/6911225
```

If the container runtime supports the WebSocket streaming protocol and at least
one of the subprotocol versions (e.g. `v5.channel.k8s.io`), the server responds
with a successful `101 Switching Protocols` status, along with the negotiated
subprotocol version:

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: Don't mark this as shell as it's not a shell script. Try console instead.

Author: Fixed.

Response Status: 101 Switching Protocols in 3 milliseconds
Response Headers:
    Upgrade: websocket
    Connection: Upgrade
    Sec-Websocket-Accept: j0/jHW9RpaUoGsUAv97EcKw8jFM=
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io
```

At this point the TCP connection used for the HTTP protocol has changed to a
streaming connection. Subsequent STDIN, STDOUT, and STDERR data (as well as TTY
and process exit code data) for this shell interaction is then streamed over this
upgraded connection.

## How to use the new WebSocket streaming protocol

> If your cluster and kubectl are on version 1.29 or later, there are two
> control plane feature flags and two kubectl feature flags that govern
> the use of the new WebSocket streaming protocol. In version 1.31 and
> later, all of the following feature flags are in beta and are enabled by
> default:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your cluster and kubectl are on version 1.29 or later, there are two
control plane feature gates and two kubectl environment variables that
govern the use of the WebSockets rather than SPDR. In Kubernetes 1.31,
all of the following feature gates are in beta and are enabled by
default:
```

Author: Fixed.

> - Control Plane Feature Flags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
```

Author: Fixed.

>   - TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests
>       - `.../exec`
>       - `.../attach`
>   - PortForwardWebsockets
>       - `.../port-forward`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests`
      - `.../exec`
      - `.../attach`
  - `PortForwardWebsockets`
      - `.../port-forward`
```

Author: Fixed.

> - kubectl Feature Flags (environment variables)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- kubectl feature control environment variables
```

Author: Fixed.

  - `KUBECTL_REMOTE_COMMAND_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl exec`
      - `kubectl cp`
      - `kubectl attach`
  - `KUBECTL_PORT_FORWARD_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl port-forward`

> 

Reviewer 2: (optionally)
```suggestion

If you're connecting to an older cluster but can manage the feature gate settings, turn on
`TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` and `PortForwardWebsockets` to try this new
behavior (you'll need Kubernetes v1.29 or v1.30 to try it out).

```

Author: I added this small paragraph, but there is a subtle distinction I added. The `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` feature gate is the only one available in v1.29. The `PortForwardWebsockets` feature gate is not available until v1.30. Please have a look at what I wrote, and let me know what you think.

## Learn more about streaming APIs

> - [KEP - Transitioning from SPDY to Websockets](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/4006-transition-spdy-to-websockets)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [KEP 4006 - Transitioning from SPDY to Websockets](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/4006-transition-spdy-to-websockets)
```

Author: Fixed.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Streaming Transitions from SPDY to WebSockets'
date: 2024-08-20
slug: websockets-transition
author: >
  [Sean Sullivan](https://github.com/seans3) (Google)
  [Shannon Kularathna](https://github.com/shannonxtreme) (Google)
---

In Kubernetes 1.31, by default kubectl now uses the WebSocket protocol
instead of SPDY for streaming.

This post describes what these changes mean for you and why these streaming APIs
matter.

## Streaming APIs in Kubernetes

In Kubernetes, specific endpoints that are exposed as an HTTP or RESTful
interface are upgraded to streaming connections, which require a streaming
protocol. Unlike HTTP, which is a request-response protocol, a streaming

> protocol provides a persistent connection that's bi-directional, low-latency,

Reviewer 3: (nit) 

I would not contract and go for "that is" in full form

Reviewer 2: For blog articles, we typically let the author write as them. No need to change here @seans3 if you are happy not to.

Reviewer 3: @sftim thanks for letting me know!

and lets you interact in real-time. Streaming protocols support reading and
writing data between your client and the server, in both directions, over the
same connection. This type of connection is useful, for example, when you create
a shell in a running container from your local workstation and run commands in
the container.

## Why change the streaming protocol?

Before the v1.31 release, Kubernetes used the SPDY/3.1 protocol by default when
upgrading streaming connections. SPDY/3.1 has been deprecated for eight years,
and it was never standardized. Many modern proxies, gateways, and load balancers
no longer support the protocol. As a result, you might notice that commands like
`kubectl cp`, `kubectl attach`, `kubectl exec`, and `kubectl port-forward`
stop working when you try to access your cluster through a proxy or gateway.

> As of Kubernetes v1.31, we've modified the streaming protocol that a Kubernetes

Reviewer 3: another nit

Full form "we have"

Reviewer 2: For blog articles, we typically let the author write as them. No need to change here @seans3 if you are happy not to.

Reviewer 2: However it's good to qualify “we“; for example, it could mean _we, Google, have modified this protocol_ or _we, SIG API Machinery, have&hellip;_ or even _we, Sean and Shannon, made the code changes&hellip;_

Author: Fixed.

client (such as `kubectl`) uses for these commands to the more modern
[WebSocket streaming protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6455).
The WebSocket protocol is a currently supported standardized streaming protocol
that guarantees compatibility and interoperability with different components and
programming languages. The WebSocket protocol is more widely supported by modern
proxies and gateways than SPDY.

## How streaming APIs work

Kubernetes upgrades HTTP connections to streaming connections by adding
specific upgrade headers to the originating HTTP request. For example, an HTTP
upgrade request for running the `date` command on an `nginx` container within
a cluster is similar to the following:

```console
$ kubectl exec -v=8 nginx -- date
GET https://127.0.0.1:43251/api/v1/namespaces/default/pods/nginx/exec?command=date…
Request Headers:
    Connection: Upgrade
    Upgrade: websocket
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io

>     User-Agent: kubectl/v1.30.1 (linux/amd64) kubernetes/6911225

Reviewer 2: For the look of the thing, maybe this could be `kubectl 1.31.0` and an appropriate build number?

(we can do a fixup after the release, between the merge and actual publication).

Author: Fixed by changing `v1.30.1` to `v1.31.0`.

```

If the container runtime supports the WebSocket streaming protocol and at least
one of the subprotocol versions (e.g. `v5.channel.k8s.io`), the server responds
with a successful `101 Switching Protocols` status, along with the negotiated
subprotocol version:

```console
Response Status: 101 Switching Protocols in 3 milliseconds
Response Headers:
    Upgrade: websocket
    Connection: Upgrade
    Sec-Websocket-Accept: j0/jHW9RpaUoGsUAv97EcKw8jFM=
    Sec-Websocket-Protocol: v5.channel.k8s.io
```

At this point the TCP connection used for the HTTP protocol has changed to a

> streaming connection. Subsequent STDIN, STDOUT, and STDERR data (as well as TTY

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
streaming connection. Subsequent STDIN, STDOUT, and STDERR data (as well as terminal
```
What kind of data is it? If Windows containers can have a terminal, “TTY“ isn't quite right (Windows doesn't really use the term _teletype_, which TTY is an abbreviation of).

Author: The TTY data is terminal window resizing data. So I've just termed it `terminal resizing data`. Please let me know what you think.

and process exit code data) for this shell interaction is then streamed over this
upgraded connection.

## How to use the new WebSocket streaming protocol

If your cluster and kubectl are on version 1.29 or later, there are two
control plane feature gates and two kubectl environment variables that
govern the use of the WebSockets rather than SPDY. In Kubernetes 1.31,
all of the following feature gates are in beta and are enabled by
default:

- [Feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
  - `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests`
      - `.../exec`
      - `.../attach`
  - `PortForwardWebsockets`
      - `.../port-forward`
- kubectl feature control environment variables
  - `KUBECTL_REMOTE_COMMAND_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl exec`
      - `kubectl cp`
      - `kubectl attach`
  - `KUBECTL_PORT_FORWARD_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl port-forward`

If you're connecting to an older cluster but can manage the feature gate

> settings, turn on `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` (available in

Reviewer 3: (nit)

Turn on X and Y -> Turn on both X and Y

Author: Fixed.

> settings, turn on `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` (available in

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
settings, turn on `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` (added in
```

Author: Fixed.

> Kubernetes v1.29) and `PortForwardWebsockets` (available in Kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.29) and `PortForwardWebsockets` (added in Kubernetes
```

Author: Fixed.

> v1.30) to try this new behavior.

Reviewer 2: For clarity:
```suggestion
v1.30) to try this new behavior. Version 1.31 of `kubectl` can automatically use the new behavior,
but you do need to connect to a cluster where the server-side features are explicitly enabled.
```

Author: Added.

---
layout: blog

> title: 'Streaming Transitions from SPDY to WebSockets'

Reviewer 2: Should the title mention Kubernetes 1.31? A typical post-release article does.

/lgtm cancel

Reviewer 4: It should be: 
`title: "Kubernetes 1.31: Streaming Transitions from SPDY to WebSockets"`

Author: Fixed.

matter.

## Streaming APIs in Kubernetes

In Kubernetes, specific endpoints that are exposed as an HTTP or RESTful
interface are upgraded to streaming connections, which require a streaming
protocol. Unlike HTTP, which is a request-response protocol, a streaming
protocol provides a persistent connection that's bi-directional, low-latency,
and lets you interact in real-time. Streaming protocols support reading and
writing data between your client and the server, in both directions, over the
same connection. This type of connection is useful, for example, when you create
a shell in a running container from your local workstation and run commands in
the container.

## Why change the streaming protocol?

Before the v1.31 release, Kubernetes used the SPDY/3.1 protocol by default when
upgrading streaming connections. SPDY/3.1 has been deprecated for eight years,
and it was never standardized. Many modern proxies, gateways, and load balancers
no longer support the protocol. As a result, you might notice that commands like
`kubectl cp`, `kubectl attach`, `kubectl exec`, and `kubectl port-forward`
stop working when you try to access your cluster through a proxy or gateway.

> As of Kubernetes v1.31, SIG API Machinery have modified the streaming

Reviewer 4: A minor typo:
It should be: "SIG API Machinery **has** modified the streaming..."

Author: `have` changed to `has`

If your cluster and kubectl are on version 1.29 or later, there are two
control plane feature gates and two kubectl environment variables that
govern the use of the WebSockets rather than SPDY. In Kubernetes 1.31,
all of the following feature gates are in beta and are enabled by
default:

- [Feature gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
  - `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests`
      - `.../exec`
      - `.../attach`
  - `PortForwardWebsockets`
      - `.../port-forward`
- kubectl feature control environment variables
  - `KUBECTL_REMOTE_COMMAND_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl exec`
      - `kubectl cp`
      - `kubectl attach`
  - `KUBECTL_PORT_FORWARD_WEBSOCKETS`
      - `kubectl port-forward`

If you're connecting to an older cluster but can manage the feature gate
settings, turn on both `TranslateStreamCloseWebsocketRequests` (added in
Kubernetes v1.29) and `PortForwardWebsockets` (added in Kubernetes
v1.30) to try this new behavior. Version 1.31 of `kubectl` can automatically use
the new behavior, but you do need to connect to a cluster where the server-side
features are explicitly enabled.

## Learn more about streaming APIs

> - [KEP 4006 - Transitioning from SPDY to Websockets](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/4006-transition-spdy-to-websockets)

Reviewer 4: nit:
It should be "WebSockets"

Author: Fixed.

> - [RFC 6455 - The Websocket Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6455)

Reviewer 4: nit:
It should be "WebSockets"

Author: Fixed.
